vegetable oil is a fat extracted from
the fruit or seeds of certain plants
such as corn canola cottonseed safflower
sunflower or soybean there are various
ways to extract the oil the method we're
about to see is called cold pressing it
all starts with seeds in this case a
dark variety of sunflower seeds cold
pressing yields less oil than other
methods so it's usually just smaller
specialty companies that use the process
the big vegetable oil makers tend to use
solvents and high pressure high speed
presses that's much more productive but
it also generates heat which darkens the
oil and diminishes its flavor and
nutritional value these seeds shells and
all will go through this low pressure
press the temperature inside is kept
below 40 degrees Celsius hence the term
cold pressed the press operator has to
carefully monitor and adjust the speed
pressure and temperature because keeping
a press cool is no easy task given the
heat that mashing seeds naturally
generates the pressing mechanism the
screw press is made up of several
sections so they can shorten or lengthen
it according to the type of seeds
they're pressing to allow for a more or
less room for the seeds within the
chamber
100 kilograms of seeds per hour go
through the press producing some 38
liters of oil low volume but high
quality the seed residue called seed
cakes is later sold for animal feed now
though it's key to monitoring
temperature if the seed cakes are too
warm that means heat is building up and
they have to open the exit wider to
reduce the inside pressure and bring the
temperature down once the oil is
extracted they pump it through a
filtration system
these cloth filters allow the oil to
pass through but any remaining seed
residue gets caught in the fibers the
oil runs through the filters repeatedly
until it becomes clear
mastering the art of cold pressing takes
a lot of know-how and experience but it
results in oil that's healthier and
tastier cold-pressed oils made from
other seeds pose different production
challenges flax seed and hemp seed are
extremely sensitive to heat so workers
have to cool the press during the
process to offset the heat that pressing
generates canola on the other hand isn't
particularly sensitive to heat nor is
sesame
all natural no preservatives deploy
alike these have to be babied because
exposure to air makes them prematurely
spoil plastic isn't airtight so they
bottle these oils in glass dark glass to
block oils other enemy light they seal
the bottles with a flow control cap
without preservatives sunflower canola
and sesame oils have an 18-month
shelf-life flaxseed and hemp seed oils
have to be refrigerated even then they
go bad after just a few months